Software development is complex and as you would expect there are [several software development approaches]((http://www.quora.com/What-is-are-the-best-software-development-philosophy-ies), philosophies and principles. Most organisations ascribe to one or more of these approaches. The most widely used approaches are the Agile and the Unix philosophies.

The Unix philosophy advocates for programs that do one thing very well. Programs that work together and provide universal interfaces and in particular to text streams. The idea stems from years of experience developing the Unix tools. The Unix philosophy it is not a written manifesto that you have to ascribe to or sign, it is a respected tradition that organically grew from writing the early Unix operating system and associated tools.

The agile manifesto is a lose fabric of approaches that aim to deliver working software to clients. It emphasizes on continuous s testing and deployment. It places special emphasize on working with the client, consulting regular and lack of formal methods. It is not surprising that agile appears as anti-establishment, a disrupting approach to what was then the formal software development methodologies.  Agile was quick to be adopted by early disruptive technologies like Ruby on Rails and the architects came to be Agile’s staunchest evangelists. 

With its maturation as a scientific discipline that prides on Unix and Linux history and tradition and a rich client base, bioinformatics software is a thorny garden. Most of the current bioinformatics software is a broken half sinking ship that magically floats and somehow manages to deliver cargo. It changes captains and rotates the crew. Sometimes the passengers take the wheel for an adrenaline serge with fatal consequences. 

This leads me to the current efforts to establish a bioinformatics software philosophy and manifesto, the bioinformatics manifesto aka [small tools for bioinformatics]((https://github.com/pjotrp/bioinformatics) begins by stating that bioinformatics tools are fragmented largely due to the key challenges with biological data and analysis which include: scaling of calculations, full data integration and Data interaction and visualization
The manifesto aimes to counter current trends in bioinformatics where institutes and companies create monolithic software solutions for end users. These tools are often excedingly expensive. It is a call to the Unix philosophy and practice and the use of true open source licenses.

The manifesto goes a step further to address how to package and distribute bioinformatics tools. The present approach is broken and mostly a URL is as good as the acceptance of the publication. Thereafter the link goes stale and maintenance is thrown to the dogs.

So will small tools for bioinformatics deliver? That remains to be seen. But first it has to gain a wide adoption and acceptance. As of this writing,
48 bioinformaticians have [publicly signed the manifesto](https://github.com/pjotrp/bioinformatics). 
It is a rational approach to start weeding and pruning the thorny garden of bioinformatics software. It does not advocate for new fangled ideas or philosophy, it is a call toremain true to tested approaches in software development.
